The Joe Rogan experience. I think that's one of the weirdest things about today,
right? Is that we're faced with these unparalleled
crisises where we really, we don't have anything to go off of.
We don't have a similar situation that happened, you know,
in 1985 where we are today with the Corona virus and then
with the subsequent lockdown of the economy where everyone's terrified,
and then you have the George Floyd murder,
and then you have the looting and the riots and the chaos and the protest.
And then you have the coronavirus kicks in again.
And our leaders look impotent and we,
we can't look to what I mean when you have a guy like Donald Trump in office
already, you have a situation like Jesus,
I hope the cabinet can keep this thing together.
I hope the Senate can hold this. And this is madness.
We had a reality show host, who's the president,
but then all the mayors are up all the governor.
No one it's not even that they're up is that no one is equipped to handle this.
So you see unprecedented anger, particularly online where, you know,
you're, you're dealing with people. And this is one,
one of the things that drew me to you is one of the tweets that you made about
processed information,
that online information is essentially processed information.
When you're dealing with like social media versus like actual communication like
you and I are having right now, which is what resonates with people.
I think it's one of the things that resonates with podcasts.
It's one of the reasons why I prefer to do them in person.
It's the closest thing to a real conversation with a real person.
Whereas this viewing of text white on
black, you know, white letters. In my case,
I use the night mode on a black screen. It's so weird.
Like you, you, you have to interpret intent. You have to try to get,
and then you're not getting any social cues from the person you're not,
there's not a back and forth. It's just, you spit something out.
They spit something back. And it's, you're trying to
approximate what it's like to actually talk to a person it's very
processed. I thought, I thought that was the way you described.
It was really the perfect definition of what ails us were.
So many people today are communicating in this way.
And it's very similar to people surviving of a processed food
and becoming sick.
So if you think about, if you think about how processed food was was created,
basically, and I mean, modern ultra processed food,
because these terms are all really slippery, right? Just like the term natural.
So this is on a spectrum, right?
The history of cooking is a history of processing food, right? You like to cook.
I like to cook that's processing food.
Dessert is a kind of food that's been made to be highly palatable. You know?
So it's not about processing being intrinsically evil,
but with ultra processed foods,
what you've got is you've got a bunch of companies that are like, all right,
what can we exploit about human appetites to make
foods as compulsively, eatable as possible? Right? It's terrifying. You've got,
I think Coca Cola.
I think it was said something like we have to conquer stomach share.
This is a term they use. Yeah. So like, there's a, if you think about,
you have a hundred things of the stomach, right? Like, okay,
so we got a hundred percent of the stomach,
like how can Coca-Cola fill the maximum amount of
stomach share in, in the humans of the world.
Wow. What a bizarre way of looking at people. It's.
Terrifying. Right. And so then,
and they did it because they got the smartest people, you know,
they've got great chemists and biologists working, you know,
day and night to figure out how to conquer stomach share. And they did it right.
And one of the ways they did it also was make it cheap and accessible.
There's vending machines in every school. I mean, think for a second,
how crazy that is,
that there are vending machines with just Coca-Cola and candy bars and stuff in
every single school we have, you know, it's that, but, but it happened right.
And so now we live in a world in which extremely cheap,
highly palatable and very accessible food is
everywhere.
No wonder we have a problem with our diets and that's exactly
what's happening with information right now. So I, as, as I understand it,
the way in which Twitter was designed, for example,
they consulted with people who wanted to figure out how to keep you compulsively
coming back. So like slot machines, right.
They consulted with people who build slot machines to figure out, okay,
what P what keeps people pulling the lever, right?
So they could just have it refresh. You just have your tweets at the top,
but instead there's a little alert button, right? You pull down,
there's a little noise, like, or whatever the noise is when you,
when you pull down on it, you know? And so they've made it compulsive.
They've made it highly palatable, right? You want to,
you want to keep coming back.
And the thing is the difference between ultra processed information and ultra
processed food is that I think we're, we're, we're the companies now.
And that really freaks me out the consumers.
We're also the manufacturers. And we're also the distributors.
We make the meme.
Someone is going to take some cut of this show and turn it
into a sound bite.
That's highly palatable in the way that that information becomes highly
palatable. It's going to be oversimplified, right?
It's going to have heroes and villains. It's going to have a,
this is going to demonize someone and it's going to be something that gives you
a sense of belonging.
Those are the three things I think that make information highly processed and
highly palatable. We want a hit of information.
That's easy to understand that demonizes someone.
And that gives us a sense of belonging.
And that's just like exploding what humans want. Right? You're saying, you know,
we're creatures that want to love each other. We want to belong, right.
It's just the same way we want to taste salt, sugar, and fat.
We want to feel these things and the information that we have around us now,
it's the, it's the same thing as a Snickers bar,
except the differences were Snickers. We're making it.
And we're behaving like junkies, like rabid junkies. If you look at,
I don't know what percentage of Twitter discourse ends in people being angry
with each other, but it seems like it's half at least. I mean, it's just,
there's so much rabid discourse does just people
at each other and insulting each other.
And it's so unlike anywhere else in the world,
and unless you're in a war zone, like the way people talk to each other,
if people talked to each other in real life, the way they talked in on Twitter,
the emergency ward would be filled with people with broken faces and
shattered eye sockets. It'd be chaos.
It's road rage. It's how you treat people.
It's how you treat the person in the other car.
That's cut you off because they're not, they've been dehumanized.
They're isolated, right?
It's like Twitter just allows you to end social media in certain ways,
facilitates being angry in the way that you get angry at other car,
you like honking. You're like, you, man. I hate you. It like, you know.
What also causes that, the reason why people do that in road rage,
it's because your sensors are heightened because you're moving so fast. Yeah.
Because you're,
you're aware that split-second decision-making is it's important to
survival. So when you're going 65 miles an hour,
and you're looking around at everybody in this guy gets it frigging,
like you're already at seven or eight.
And I think this is also a part of the problem today,
online because of the coronavirus and because of the lockdown and
economic instability. And when we're at unprecedented joblessness right now,
I mean, people are really hopeless. There's a lot of people that,
that we got one $1,200 check from the government and then that's it.
And then you, you know,
you hear that Kanye west got this giant loan and Judd Apatow got this giant
love. These really wealthy people are getting all this money. But meanwhile,
salon owners, small business owners,
didn't a lot of people are just furious at everything because it's
like driving a car you're, you're already heightened.
So this information that comes at you,
maybe wouldn't have you off under normal circumstances, but now you're.
Right. It's like stress eating or something. So we have this,
I hadn't really thought about that with, uh, with road rage,
but it does make sense. Right. So when you're, when you're already at that,
when you're already at that level,
then you're going to be even more likely to need that kind of information,
want to participate in that kind of dialogue. You're a dialogue, but no,
it's not it's. Yeah. Yeah. It's I, and there's ways we can,
we can stop it.
I really think we can stop it by
focusing on problems with the system and problems with ourselves. Right.
It's both of us.
Cause we're the ones manufacturing it and we're the ones consuming it so we can
do things about it. And it ranges from, you know, I mean,
I don't like I don't have, I don't want to still don't have a smart,
you don't know, flip phone.
With wow. Purpose. Yeah.
Um, I mean, in part, not because you tweet.
A lot. I do so well.
It is. I know it's compulsive.
I think the reason I don't have it is because if I had a smartphone, man,
it'd be all over. I be on it all the time. Um, I mean, when I'm at home,
cause I, you know, because I work from home, sometimes my wife has,
my wife has a smartphone. Um, and so I'll always be like using her folks.
Like if you don't have a phone, you can't just go use my phone. Right.
And then I'm installing things on my computer, like freedom,
which is this app that blocks you from, I mean, it's literally like, you know,
with food, right. People have those logs that only open.
So I have an app that like locks me out of these sites. I have.
A folder on my desktop, um, or on my, uh, I guess yeah,
my desktop of my phone, um, that says junkie and, uh,
that's all of my, uh, Instagram and Twitter and all that stuff.
I'm to show it to you, but.
It's important that, that kind of thing. So we need,
I think we all need to collectively take steps in that way,
but also we need to realize, and this is really important, right?
It's not just about natural unnatural. It's not just about technology.
We've had this kind of junk food information around forever.
And this is where I think for me is, uh, as a scholar of religious studies,
right? If you look at myths and folktales and fairytales,
and if you look at the structure of religions,
there are ways to tell stories, to get people heightened.
There are ways to tell stories, to make people feel belonging.
There are ways to tell stories to demonize people, right?
These tropes have been alive. They've been around forever. Right?
What do you do? You create a villain?
You tell a story about redemption. You tell a story about a fall.
You tell a story in which the people who are hearing the story just
by hearing it become heroes, right? These are,
these are things that have been around for a long time in the same way that if
you go back 2000 years,
if you were super rich and had access to lots of delicious salty, sugary,
fatty food, you could get fat. It was just a lot harder back then.
And in the same way,
now we facilitated the manufacturer of this kind of these,
these junk narratives that in small doses, I think are fine.
But if it's all we're consuming, it's a, it's a disaster.
And we're going to end up, I think, with some kind of,
with some problems that are analogous to the health problems that we're seeing
because of what we eat, except they're going to be problems in our soul. Right.
I mean your mental diabetes. Yeah. I mean, it's, I, I feel like it's, uh,
I mean, I'm not,
I'm not like a sort of organized religious religion person myself,
but I would say it's not just mental. It's like our souls,
there's something deeply corrupting of our humanity
and I, and I catch myself doing it. So like,
so that tweet that you were talking about, I had,
I had written a piece a week before that, about Trump visiting, um,
what's that, you know, visiting the church and holding up the Bible,
it was this really angry piece. And I was like, I'm gonna, you know,
I'm going to, I'm going to write about how terrible this is. Um, and,
and put this out there, right?
The way he set it up to like tear gas and all the protesters to clear the air.
I was like, what.
A, what a horrible thing. Right.
I'm going to tell everybody how horrible this is. I'm going to get my anger out.
And then I, and then when the article came out,
I just realized that I was just sending it into the machine. Right.
And it was going to get ground up. And the people who already agreed with it,
we're going to read it and be like, yeah, it's terrible.
And the people that disagreed with it are either never going to read it or
they're going to see it. And they're going to be like,
see people keep attacking Trump. Like, they're all crazy. And, and it,
it was sort of like a Chrysler. She was like, I don't want, wanna.
I don't want to be doing, I don't want to be putting.
Anything into this machine if it's just going to get
processed into junk information so that we can feed our
habit.
And this is a habit that we really don't know how to navigate.
We've only been dealing with this habit for when to Twitter get invented 2007.
It was very recent. Yeah.
That's not enough time for us to figure out how to do it. Right. I mean,
do you remember, like during the, uh, I'm 52?
So when I was a kid watching television for,
for kids all day was fairly new, right.
It only been like a generation or two that,
that was even possible to just watch TV all the time. Right.
And it was constantly thought of as the corrupting thing, like get out,
get away from the TV. You're all you do is watch TV, get up, get outside.
And that was sort of the first indication that there's,
there's a potential for an unhealthy relationship with technology and with
distributed content. Right.
But I think Twitter is far more toxic than that because you're actually
putting the content out yourself and then you're waiting to see how people
respond and you shift the way you interact with people based on
how they respond to your tweets. Right. It's the belonging. Yes.
Or your Facebook posts or what have you.
It, it, it created, I mean, it's interesting, you say that,
like thinking again about food.
Cause I'm obsessed with like the first book I wrote was about food. Um,
and like how we came to fear, certain foods like fat or salt or sugar and,
and thinking about it in this way, right.
You need a technology to be able to process something,
to get it cheap enough so that it can be widely consumed. Right.
So information that allows you to belong right. For a long time,
only certain people. I mean, for, for a while, right.
It's only people who could read and write, right. So that's,
that's all you've got. Those are the only people who could prove set.
And then now every,
every it's so cheap to produce information that makes you a part of a community
it's free. Right. When you do it, we do it all the time. And like you said,
we haven't figured out how to navigate it. And that's another confusion.
I think that people have with natural versus unnatural,
which is that we also just have problems with novelty as human beings, right.
Something new comes up. We don't,
we still don't know how to navigate our food system. Right.
We still don't know how to stop people from eating too much.
We don't, we don't know how to do it collectively as a society,
we clearly have not solved this problem.
And yet it's important to remember that for most of the world,
the problem is still not having enough. Right.
So there was a time when the problem was, people had no information,
you just didn't know anything. You knew nothing. And that sucked. Right.
So it's great that we have the internet that was far worse. Yeah.
That was far worse. Um, or at least not, I'm gonna remember,
like it was Def it was,
it was really bad and it was bad in a profoundly different way. I mean,
this goes back to like the, with the hunter gatherer thing, right?
Whether it was better in a state of nature. I often hear people.
There's a great book called against the grain written by, uh, um,
by a guy who is he's at Yale.
And he thinks that we need to be easier on the past and harder on the president
in this book. And one of the things he points out is like, oh,
people these days like humans, modern humans United,
we go out and we don't know what a plant is,
or we don't know what an animal is and he's right, right. We don't,
most people don't have, uh,
have the knowledge of the natural world that hunter gatherers do.
But at the same time, they don't know about the germ theory of disease.
They don't know about, you know, planetary cycles.
And so it's always important for me,
at least as soon as I start to get sucked into one of these binaries, right.
It was so bad. It's so bad.
Now today to remember that it was also bad,
bad in different ways in the past.
And we can't make the mistake of thinking that the problem with information in
our, in our consuming of it today,
we can't make the mistake of thinking that that the evil is in the form. It,
we can make it good. We can make it better. We can learn how to deal with this.
I think, um, I hope as long as we're conscious of that,